We shall defend our island,
whatever the cost may be!
Welcome to Question Time.
On tonight’s panel,
George Eustice, Secretary of State
for the Environment,
Food and Rural Affairs.
Labour’s newly appointed
Shadow Home Secretary,
Nick Thomas—Symonds,
who joins us down the line from his
constituency in South Wales.
Afua Hirsch, commentator,
broadcaster and author of a book
on British identity,
Brit(ish): On Race,
Identity and Belonging.
Juergen Meyer, industrialist and
former chief executive of Siemens,
business adviser and board member
of the Northern
Powerhouse partnership.
He joins us from Manchester.
And Chris Hopson, chief
executive of NHS Providers,
an organisation for all of England’s
ambulance, community,
hospital and mental health trusts.
Good evening.
Welcome very much to our panellists
here, and of course toJuergen
and Nick, who arejoining us
down the line.
You know the score by now.
We have no physical audience
here in the studio.
But this week’s pre—recorded
questions come from Newcastle,
which is where we were intending
to be before all of this happened.
And we’ll be taking a couple
of questions live as well tonight.
And as usual of course we’ve been
hearing from you at home via social
media, and if you want to keep
on feeding your questions
and your comments in, contact us
on social media, @bbcquestiontime.
I’ll get them on this tablet
here and I’ll feed those
in to the panel as we go along.
So let’s take our first question
tonight, and we arejoined
by Margaret Collins.
Margaret, good evening.
Good evening.
I have many questions
concerning our Government’s
handling of the coronavirus,
but this morning I read,
according to statistics
from John Hopkins University,
Sweden has 28 deaths
per 100,000 inhabitants.
Norway has four deaths
Denmark has 8.7, Finland has 4.5.
Even the USA has less
than the UK, at 21.7.
So they are all lower than the UK,
which has a nationwide lockdown,
and the toll is significantly
higher, at 44.1; per
100,000 inhabitants.
My question is why and how did
the Government let this happen
when we had advanced warning
of the figures coming
out of other countries?
As a country, we are meant to be
celebrating VE Day tomorrow,
but who feels like celebrating?
I don’t feel particularly
proud of being British
when I see figures like that.
Chris, let’s start with you.
Well, the death rate
is clearly very concerning.
And we can talk about numbers
but behind each individual number
there is a personal tragedy for both
the individual concerned but also
their relatives and families.
But what do you think
when you hear Margaret list
those numbers like that?
Well, it’s very concerning.
If you look at the levels
of mortality that we
have in this country.
I do think, though, when I talk
to my public health colleagues,
what they say to me is,
"Just be very careful about making
international comparisons at this
point," because there are a number
of different reasons as to why
different countries may have
different death rates.
For example, there isn’t
a single universal way
of recording coronavirus...
I get that, and obviously that’s
something the Government have
been very keen to say.
But, nonetheless, whether we are
the worst in Europe,
we’ve got the highest death toll
in Europe or the second
highest rate in Europe,
maybe even the third,
it’s not where anyone
would want to be.
And Margaret’s question
is why has this happened?
What’s your view, given your
at the coal face with the ambulance
workers and the hospital workers?
Well, quite rightly, Margaret wants
an answer to that question,
given the level we’re at.
The reality is we are going to have
to wait to do the real detailed
analysis to find out
what has happened here.
And I think, as I said,
it’s dangerous, and that’s certainly
what our public health expert
colleagues say, to draw
conclusions at this point.
But, clearly, with 30,000 deaths,
it is a real issue.
I think there are some
conclusions we can draw.
I’m not party to the intelligence
and information that the Government
has but I remember in February two
local schools where I live
in south London were closed
because of coronavirus outbreaks
and concerns of the
infection spreading.
By then, other countries
were already implementing lockdown
measures, and it was weeks
before our Government started
to take this seriously.
And I think that Margaret’s
question, which is a really sad one
and an honest one to hear,
has kind of two components.
One, why has the Government
handled it this way?
Why has everything taken so long?
Why do we always feel
like we’re playing catch up
on PPE, lockdown measures?
And then the second component
is the Government’s tone.
Because, for me, to hear our
Government congratulating
itself on the way it’s
handled this outbreak...
So BorisJohnson called
it "Our apparent success.
It’s insulting to the people
who continue to die every day,
and what I would like to see
is honesty from the Government,
acknowledging that this
was not well handled,
that mistakes have been made,
and telling us clearly
and transparently what they intend
to do differently.
Because at the moment the gulf
between what we are experiencing,
the number of people who are dying,
the heartbreaking scenarios
of people dying alone,
often in unnecessary circumstances
because we haven’t got a grip
on this, and the Government’s
rhetoric is only losing further
tmst.
And I think trust is important right
now, and until the Government show
some honesty and integrity we can’t
even begin to see how
we can move forward.
And, Juergen, I saw
you were nodding at that?
Well, yeah, I think Margaret’s
question is absolutely spot on,
and what you said in your question,
Margaret, is that we
didn’t plan ahead.
So we are managing this
in the here and now and that makes
managing a crisis like this
unbelievably difficult,
and I think we should say a huge
thank—you to all of the people
who are doing that, but what should
have happened is we should have
spent much more time
planning early on.
And we saw the signs from Italy,
and we knew that we had to put
testing capacity in place,
and we didn’t do that early enough.
And we didn’t lock down fast enough.
You know, there should have been
a hard, fast lockdown.
And, in hindsight, we know that
would have been better,
but we didn’t plan well enough
ahead, I’m afraid.
It is interesting,
because in February the UK
was ranked second best placed
to deal with a pandemic.
This was by the Global
Health Security Index.
Margaret saying, "How has
the Government let it happen
where we have a death toll
as we have?"
Nick?
Well, it clearly isn’t a reason
for celebration, Fiona.
It’s an extraordinary
tragedy for our country,
and a tragedy for each and every
family, and to see that figure today
of over 30,600 deaths
was startling, and shocking.
So what did you think
when the Prime Minister described
it, talked about our response
to the pandemic as our
apparent success?
Well, it’s not a success
or an apparent success, Fiona,
and throughout this crisis we have
quite rightly supported
the Government in its aim
of minimising loss of life.
But we’ve also called out things
when we thought the Government
wasn’t acting quite the way that it
should, and there are questions
about how well—prepared the country
was for this particular
type of pandemic.
But we were also slow in lockdown,
slow in terms of a comprehensive
testing and tracing strategy,
and there have been significant
problems between what the Government
has said is available,
in terms of personal
protective equipment,
and what has actually got
to the front line...
And you say that the
Government was...
Sorry, cutting across you.
You say the Government was too slow
in introducing the lockdown.
Was Labour calling for the lockdown
to be introduced earlier?
Yes, yes, absolutely, Fiona,
and I was there are actually
in the House of Commons on the 23rd
of March and we actually called
for the lockdown in the House
of Commons prior to it
being announced later that day.
And I think that was something
we raised on the floor
of the House that day.
But what about earlier than that?
Because that was obviouslyjust
a few hours earlier.
If you’re saying the Government
was too late in introducing
a lockdown, presumably you don’t
mean by a few hours.
I don’t really recall that,
but maybe I missed it,
Labour calling for a lockdown
in February, say, for example?
No...
Well, listen, what we’ve tried to do
throughout this crisis
is to be supportive,
Fiona.
You ask me about when we
called for a lockdown.
I was set in the House of Commons
on the day that we did,
but the point that I’m making,
really, is that of course
we will come to a point
in the future when we must look very
robustly, with great scrutiny,
as to what the Government did
and what differently it could have
done throughout this crisis.
We have to answer that question
as to why we’ve ended up with this
tragic death toll as we have.
But at the same time
we can’t simply say,
"This is something for the future."
I hope the Government is learning
lessons as it is going along
on the issues of testing
and tracing, on the issues
of personal protective equipment,
to try to minimise loss
of life going forward.
George, apparent success.
Is that how you describe it?
Well, look, what the Prime Minister
was describing there is what we have
all done as a country,
people who have stayed at home,
observed social distancing,
ourfabulous NHS, and everybody else
who has responded to this crisis.
That is all to save lives,
and we now have this
terrible death toll.
Yeah, we are in an extraordinary
time and it is right to acknowledge
the steps everyone has taken,
and that’s all the Prime
Minister was doing.
Look, I think the point I’d say
here, it’s very difficult to make
these international comparisons,
because different countries are
recording deaths in different ways.
Different countries have
different circumstances.
London is a huge city with a big
public transport system.
That could have had
an impact early on.
There will be a time
and a place to reflect
and learn lessons from it.
But...
Now we are dealing with
this epidemic and we...
What is interesting
about that is I’ve watched everyone,
as you would expect in this job,
every one of the press conferences
at five o’clock since this started,
and at the beginning in the first
month or so when you are showing
those international comparisons
there was no reference to the fact
that those comparisons might be
a bit dodgy when we were below
the other European countries.
Now that we are above them
the Government is very keen to point
out that we shouldn’t be
making these comparisons.
You never said that early on.
Well, we weren’t making comparisons.
We’ve always tracked the death
rates that have been
recorded in all countries.
So you didn’t warn us of them.
We’ve tried to follow the advice
of the Chief Medical Officer
and Chief scientific advisor,
and the belief all along,
which I think was correct,
is that we were roughly two,
three weeks behind countries
like Italy and France.
We were on a different trajectory.
That’s why it wasn’t
appropriate to lockdown
at the point that they did,
but it’s not true that
we weren’t prepared.
There were all sorts of Cobra
meetings and planning meetings
taking place on this right
from January onwards.
ii
It was occupying all Matt Hancock’s
time. Lots of planning and
preparation went into responding to
this, but it was the case that the
this, but it was the rase that the
scientific
this, but it was the case that the
scientific advice was not that we
should have locked down earlier than
should have locked down eartier than
we did and,
should have locked down earlier than
we did and, as soon as the advice
was that we should lockdown, that’s
what we did. This is what I mean by
honesty. The government has been
changing its narrative to fit its
results so, initially, we liked
international comparisons because
they made us look good but, now they
make us look bad, we can’t trust
them. The advice on PPE was to use
the equipment recommended by the WHO
until it emerged we didn’t have it
and then the advice was changed. The
definition of testing was changed
when it emerged we couldn’t meet
the 100 tests.
and then the PPE advice was changed
to fit what we have.
The definition of testing
was changed when it emerged
we couldn’t meet the 100,000 tests
a day standard we promised
until we suddenly could by changing
what counts as a test,
test having been sent out rather
than a result having been received.
And for those of us
who are not medical experts,
who are just members of the public
watching people we know and love
die, there is an unavoidable feeling
that the Government is not
being honest with us
about the scale of the crisis.
Yes, we’ve all done everything
we can to try and mitigate this,
and we are all trying to come
together and help.
That doesn’t make this a success.
That makes us people
who are suffering and doing our
absolute best, in circumstances
where we can’t help but feel
that the leadership has failed us,
and I think we deserve an honest
acknowledgement of that.
Well, it’s simply not true that
there’s been, you know,
dishonesty or anything on this.
From the very beginning, we’ve been
holding daily press conferences.
The Chief Medical Officer has been
attending many of those.
And they’ve been very, very candid
about the nature of this crisis,
the reasons we are doing the things
we are doing, and very
candid about the evidence
and the epidemiology behind it,
so we’ve been I think as frank
as possible with the public,
and we’ve shared with all
of ourthinking...
So when the Health Secretary said...
I think the bit that does
need to be recognised
here is if you wind back to ten,
12 weeks, and we were looking
at what had happened in northern
Italy, where their health system had
been completely overwhelmed,
and we had the awful prospect
of people turning up to hospitals
and simply not being
able to be treated.
And I think the bit that we do need
to recognise is that the NHS has
actually created 33,000 beds
to treat coronavirus patients, we’ve
created seven Nightingale hospitals,
literally within the space
of a fortnight...
It’s not worked quite
so well with the care
sector, though, has it?
No, absolutely, we recognise...
I think everybody in the health
and care system recognises it
has not worked so well
in the care homes.
But all I’m saying is if you look
at that prospect, the NHS
was really clearly told,
"You have to do everything to avoid
that overwhelm," and I think the bit
that we do need to recognise,
because it’s due to the hard effort
of the million front line staff,
is that we have managed
to avoid that overwhelm.
And, as I said, it’s very
difficult in a sense to kind
of talk about celebration
when we are talking about this
in the context of 30,000 dead,
but we should recognise...
But why do you think...
I mean, George is saying we did
everything at the right time.
The lockdown was done
at the right time.
Why do you think, then,
if that is true, not
according to you, Afua,
why do you think we have
so many deaths, then?
Well, I think it’s really difficult
to tell at this point here.
And, as I said, I know that people,
quite rightly, want the answers,
but there are potentially
lots of reasons.
If you look at population density,
that is clearly one.
I think you raise, quite correctly,
the fact that our social care sector
has been completely neglected
and we know that what happens
in a crisis is that the crisis
inevitably finds the weakest link
in terms of the area that’s been
underinvested in that
hasn’t been sorted out.
So there are some reasons, I’m sure,
but all I’m saying is we need to be
careful aboutjumping to immediate
conclusions on the basis of,
to be frank, incomplete
evidence at this point.
Nick, oh, sorry, yes.
You know, all this discussion about
comparisons and "We are not sure".
I mean, I think the data is good
enough for us to say
that a country like ours,
like Britain, with all
of its capability,
we should have done better.
We should be doing better.
There is no doubt
about that in my mind.
And I think in terms
of the planning, and I’d
like to come back to this
point of testing.
You know, we didn’t
plan ahead well enough.
If we would have done we would have
had the tests of the 100,000
in place by the beginning of April,
not starting building it
at the beginning of April.
we’ve got a long way to go.
We need to live and manage
the situation, and I do agree
with Afua’s point that a bit
of honesty, a bit of learning,
so we can learn as we go
into the next phase and really make
sure that we make a betterjob,
as we now try and exit out
of this terrible situation.
Nick, you had your hand up,
you want to come in.
George is saying the Government has
been candid throughout.
Do you feel that?
Well, the Government
has been inconsistent,
not least around the issues
of testing and tracing.
The lockdown was absolutely
essential, but it was a blunt
instrument unless you had a testing
and tracing strategy.
Now, the Government was actually
doing community testing
but it stopped doing that
on the 12th of March.
Originally it was said
that was a policy decision,
but more lately it seems it’s been
admitted that that was
because of a lack of capacity.
Now, it took weeks and weeks
after that for the Government
to then start to actually ramp up
testing to the level
that it needed to be at.
But it’s not got to that yet,
and I’m afraid that hitting
the target on the 30th of April,
it seems that that was done
by putting a number of tests
in the post without an actual
guarantee that those
tests had been used.
And we’ve seen the test
again falling below
100,000 in recent days.
Now, that needs to be ramped up
again significantly,
and it needs to be attached
to a proper tracing strategy.
And that really has to be a focus
now for the Government
in the weeks ahead.
Let me come back to Margaret.
Margaret, you’ve set here very
patiently and listened to that,
and thank you for that.
You said figures like the ones
you quoted don’t make you feel
proud to be British.
What do you feel about
the responses you’ve heard?
0h. . .
just disappointed.
They haven’t really
answered anything.
And I agree with some of the points.
We’ve got to wait and see.
However...
So what would your question...
We’ve got George Eustice
here from the Government.
What would your question
be directly to him?
Why didn’t we have
testing, PPE earlier?
The Government must
have known about it.
Well, we have ramped up testing
considerably, so we have...
That’s not the question.
The question is why didn’t
you have it earlier.
Well, there are some countries that
had more diagnostic labs,
so countries like Germany had a lot
of those diagnostic labs.
We had to expand them from scratch.
And the Army had been involved
in this and did a fantasticjob.
We’ve now got 90 mobile testing
units around the country,
50 drive through...
But could you have
ramped it up earlier?
I mean, there’s been
an enormous effort...
They ramped it up as quickly
as they could, and we are now
about 100,000 capacity and it’s
going to double again
over the next month.
We will be ramping it up further.
Margaret, does not satisfy you?
No.
I should see as well...
I’m full of praise for the NHS.
I’m not criticising the NHS.
I think they’ve done
a wonderfuljob.
I’m criticising the Government’s
lack of preparedness.
0K.
Well, listen, Margaret,
thank you very much for your
contribution this evening.
Let’s take another question now.
Let’s talk to James Clancy.
James, would you like to
give us your question?
Yes.
Good evening.
One of the major issues that
will concern many viewers,
who will download the mobile app,
is our reluctance for the Government
to access our private data,
and all the privacy issues
of using such data.
For track, trace and quarantine
to be a success it is essential
that the Authorities have access
to our personal data, then they can
track if we have caught the virus,
to pinpoint where we have been,
and who we’ve had contact with.
When measured against
what we have already lost —
our freedom to socialise,
our future economic and job
prospects, not to mention
the potential danger to our health —
does the panel feel it is a small
price to pay to share part
of our personal data to control
and quell this virus
until the vaccine can be found?
And, James, what do you think?
Do you think it is
a price worth paying?
I do think it’s a price worth
paying, but I also as well think
we should be doing more.
We’ve got to help these tracers
to get at least a 70—90% success
rate if track and tracing
is going to be successful.
OK.
So, George...
So I think it’s a well...
That’s why I phrased
the question the way I did,
because I think it is a price
well worth paying.
50, George, the app has launched...
It has been trialled on the Isle
of Wight as of today.
You obviously do think
it is a price worth paying,
clearly, because that’s why
you’ve launched it.
Can you just explain
to us the detail of how
it’s going to work?
Say, for example, the app thatJames
is referring to, the tracing app,
I get a ping on my phone saying I’ve
been in contact with someone
who has reported symptoms
of the coronavirus.
What happens then?
So it’s been piloted, as you said,
on the Isle of Wight,
and the idea is that people will go
on to the app, they will enter their
phone number and their postcode —
and no other personal
details, by the way.
And if their mobile phone
is in contact for a certain length
of time, and that’s being trialled
in the pilot now, with mobile
phones in that area,
and that person subsequently shows
symptoms and reports those symptoms
then those other people who have
been in close or regular contact
with that person will receive
a notification to say that someone
who they were in close contact
with has reported symptoms.
And what should they then do?
And they should then
self—isolate as well.
What, for a fortnight?
For...
That’s to be decided,
but I think two weeks is one
of the things that’s been said.
And should they...
And this is very powerful
once you get to...
But hang on, wait a minute,
let’s understand how it works,
though, just to be clear.
Because this is something that may
be coming the way of all of us.
So you get an alert on your phone
saying you’ve been in touch
with someone who has reported
symptoms of coronavirus,
you self—isolate for a fortnight.
And then, what, yourfamily
has to self—isolate
for a fortnight as well?
These are details that
are being worked through,
but, essentially...
We don’t know yet?
We don’t know yet, no,
and this is why we are piloting it
in the Isle of Wight.
This could be very powerful once
you get to the point
as life starts to...
But this bit must have been worked
out, because the people on the Isle
of Wight are actually doing it.
They must know what they
should do when they...
This
Yes.
50...
They should isolate, yes.
And members of theirfamily?
I think they should isolate
as well, as is the case
if anybody has got symptoms.
But if they don’t show symptoms then
obviously it a different matter.
But this is quite powerful
because it means...
Hang on, hang on.
So they should self—isolate
if they have symptoms,
but not if they don’t have symptoms?
No, they should self—isolate
initially, but if they don’t have
symptoms then obviously
they wouldn’t need to isolate
for longer than that.
Do they get tested?
Are they going to get tested?
These are things, though,
that we are working through.
Yes, testing in conjunction
with this could be an option.
But these are details that
are being worked out.
That’s why we are piloting it,
to work out precisely
how that would work.
This could be very powerful, though,
because it will show us
where you get flare—ups
in particular parts of the country,
because lots of people
will be reporting symptoms.
So we’ll be able to track
and monitor the progress
of the virus and our success
in getting it down, but also
if there are hotspots that flare up
and action is needed
we will have that knowledge.
The crucial thing, though,
is it’s not going to be storing
and recording people’s locations
that can be identified
to an individual.
This is a system that keeps
all of that data anonymous.
It operates, you know,
as a system that keeps people
plus my identity in the clear
of any involvement.
And I know it only
launched this morning.
Do you know what the take—up has
been on the Isle of Wight?
Ah, no, I don’t have that data yet.
It’s onlyjust been...
It’s 20% so far.
0h, right.
Chris knows.
Well, that’s something.
It’s 20% so far.
Yes, it’s 20% so far.
If the app is going to work then
I think there are two or three
things that need to happen.
First, it clearly does need to work
in terms of, for example,
there are some questions about how
much battery power it
pulls off an iPhone.
The second issue is it clearly needs
to be linked to the right track
and tracing resource.
In other words, if, for example,
you have been in close
contact with somebody,
you will want to get a test very,
very quickly, and one of the issues
is that by focusing,
as we have done, on purely
hitting that 100,000,
as the Government has done —
hitting that 100,000
target by April 30th,
we haven’t really quite got
the geographic spread
that we need of testing.
So that will need to be ramped up.
Because you’ve talked
about staff members having
to wait, what, five days?
Ithink, you know...
To get a test.
We should recognise the fact that
testing capacity has grown
really quite quickly,
but the problem is if you just focus
on the number of tests on April 30,
you’re missing a whole
bunch of things.
Well, it is the only day
we’ve had that number.
The testing hotline is warning that
test results could take 7—10 days.
So if you have to go
into self isolation...
Well, that’s a real
concern for some other...
..for two weeks, then you can’t
get your results for 7—10 days...
It’s a real concern for some
of our trust leaders.
So I was talking to a trust
yesterday, I trust chief
yesterday, a trust chief
executive yesterday,
the two weeks ago was able to get
tests turned round within a day,
but they’re now taking five days.
What we are basically saying is,
"Yes, OK, the capacity as part
of the story in terms of growing
the capacity," but what we’ve got
to ensure is everybody who needs
access to a test can get it quickly,
and then the other
thing we need to...
And are you confident
that will happen?
Well, that’s the bit that’s
still kind of needs...
I mean, the NHS needs
to play its part, but we also need
support from the Government.
The other bit, which is the bit
we are specifically talking about,
is as we exit and begin to ease
lockdown, it will be really
important for everybody in the NHS
to know the role they are meant
to be playing in terms of the use
of this app and supporting it,
and this is coming really quite
quickly, but at the moment nobody
in the NHS quite knows what role
they’re meant to be playing
to support the app.
So what we will need is the results
of that pilot, that trial,
on the Isle of Wight,
circulated very quickly.
And all the trusts, GPs,
111 service, pharmacies that
are absolutely at the front line
and talking to patients,
they’ll need to know very quickly
what they are meant to be doing
in a way that they
don’t at the moment.
Well, also people need
to know how it works,
and as George doesn’t seem to be
completely clear about how it’s
going to work but...
I can’t help but feel
that the Government keeps getting
distracted by the wrong things.
I mean, we were talking about why
the Government didn’t have
testing in place earlier.
I think one of the reasons
as they were too consumed
with all these models and ideas
about herd immunity
instead of actually...
Which now seems like
a devastating idea.
Instead of doing the work of getting
testing, protective equipment,
contact tracing in place.
Now here’s this app,
which forgive me if I don’t feel
like the Government actually fully
understand how it’s
going to work, and...
And we’re still not totally clear
from what George was saying.
Well, look, it’s being piloted.
We don’t know how it’s
going to work, and...
But without testing...
We’ve heard about the NHS care home
staff who are on the front line,
who are experiencing a catastrophic
situation, still can’t get tests,
then having to apply for them
online, they are not getting
them on time.
Many care staff are saying every day
they can’t get their hands on tests.
How can whole sections
of the population who are using this
app, which the Government
is encouraging people on the Isle
of Wight to use,
without any clear idea
of whether they’ll be able
to follow up with testing...
And even though you said, George,
that there won’t be masses
of data on the database,
my understanding is that once
you sign up to the app, no,
there isn’t a lot of data,
but as soon as you develop symptoms
of coronavirus you have to have that
information stored on a database,
otherwise it can’t work.
Well, James is asking,
is that a price worth paying?
Well, I don’t know because I don’t
have confidence that the information
and data protection professionals
have been consulted in this process.
I mean, certainly I’ve seen data
protection lawyers saying
the Information Commissioner was not
consulted on the development of this
app, that it potentially fails
the NHS app standards
for data protection.
There are so many questions
about who was involved in this
process, who was consulted, what.
process, who was consulted.
What assurances can the Government
give a us in the data
protection standards?
And the NHS itself doesn’t
have a perfect track record
of storing patient data,
so I think we have every
right to be concerned.
It may be that it is a price worth
paying, but we need to be assured
that a very rigorous process has
been
undergoing before we get
to the stage of being able
to have an informed
conversation about that.
And I think we have to,
when we are giving away our civil
liberties, all of our liberties,
including privacy,
we have to be informed
about what we are giving away
and what we are getting in return.
And I haven’t seen anything
like that quality of
conversation happen yet.
Juergen, I can see
you want to come in.
Yeah.
Imean...
First of all, we absolutely
need this technology.
We need this app and we need to be
able to track and trace.
This has been the strategy
in countries that have managed
this very successfully,
in South Korea, for example.
and
andl
and I think specifically to the
point of data, you know, this needs
absolute trust and transparency. I
think everybody needs to understand
exactly what the data is going to be
used for, which is only for this
purpose of tracking and tracing, and
with that making sure we can save
with that making sure we ran save
lives.
with that making sure we can save
lives. That’s what it’s about. And
absolute trust the data will not be
used for any other commercial
purpose. One final point I would
like to make, what I am a bit
surprised about is that we are not
learning from countries that are
further ahead of this, they’ve
further ahead of this, therve
already
further ahead of this, they’ve
already resolved some of these
problems, they’ve resolved some of
problems, therve resolved some of
the privacy
problems, they’ve resolved some of
the privacy issues. And we do seem
to be going down a the tother go it
alone strategy here, and I would
suggest, let’s do our trials on the
Isla of Wight,
Isle of Wight, but it might be a
Isla of Wight, but it might be a
good idea to
Isle of Wight, but it might be a
good idea to back another horse
which is the app that has been
developed in Korea, the one
developed in Europe by Google and
Apple so we have two horses so we
ran get one of
can get one of them to work very
ran get one of them to work very
quickly,
can get one of them to work very
quickly, because we need to. Do you
think we should be doing that, Nick?
The owner, we are in favour of using
test, track and trace, and we have
been arguing for a strategy on this
for some considerable time now ——
for some considerabla time now --
the
for some considerable time now --
the owner, we
for some considerable time now ——
the owner, we are in favour. I think
the app is very much part of that,
an essential tool as we look at that
tracing strategy now going forward.
It is also true to say, though, that
It is also tme to say, though, that
it is
It is also two to say, though, that
it is going to
It is also true to say, though, that
it is going to require oversight.
Cleariy
Clearly there is going to be a set
Cleariy there is going to be a set
of data, it is
Clearly there is going to be a set
of data, it is going to have to be
held centrally. If you are going to
pick up those different parts of the
country where there are outbreaks. I
think we need to be clear that is
being protected, and as has been
already said, that the data is used
exclusively for the purpose it is
meant for which is public health
emergency and not for enforcement or
surveillance or commercial purposes.
I do think there needs to be a
Parliamentary oversight, but I think
Partiamentary oversight, but I think
the app itself
Parliamentary oversight, but I think
the app itself is going to be in a
necessity going forward in order to
move out of the lockdown. Fiona, I
think we’re missing something quite
important. Juergen spoke about the
important. juergen spoke about the
two
important. Juergen spoke about the
two different apps and we need to
understand they have different ways
in which the data is held. The
Googla
Google Apple app deliberately has a
decentralised approach and doesn’t
hold all of the data in a single
hold all of the data in a singla
database,
hold all of the data in a single
database, where is the one the
Government is developing at the
moment does, and I do think I really
intervention came about three or
four weeks ago from the former
director—general of MI5, Jonathan
director-general of MIS, jonathan
Evans, who
director—general of MI5, Jonathan
Evans, who said he thought it was
incredibly important that we had the
quality of national debate that Afua
was talking about in terms of around
these issues, and interestingly he
pointed to exactly the same thing
Nick was talking about, which is
there are circumstances where you do
use personal data, for example
fighting crime and preventing
terrorism, but there are some really
strict parliamentary oversight
procedures to ensure that that data
is being held properly. The app will
is being held property. The app will
only work if
is being held properly. The app will
only work if we can get 50—60%, 70%
only work if we ran get 50-6096, 7096
of the people
only work if we can get 50—60%, 70%
of the people to use it. I think
of the peopla to use it. I think
peopla
of the people to use it. I think
people need to be confident they can
people need to be confident they ran
tmst it, and
people need to be confident they can
trust it, and therefore what is
really important is that that
oversight should be put in place and
peopla will
people will know that the data they
peopla will know that the data they
are going to
people will know that the data they
are going to provide is not going to
be misused.
One advantage with the NHS app is
that people can trust it, it’s part
that peopla ran trust it, it’s part
of the NHS,
that people can trust it, it’s part
of the NHS, but gives better
information about where you might
get [oral
get local flare—ups so we can
get [oral ﬂare-ups so we ran
respond to
get local flare—ups so we can
respond to that and monitor local or
respond to that and monitor [oral or
regional
respond to that and monitor local or
regional pick—ups in the virus. We
regional pick-ups in the vims. We
have had a
regional pick—ups in the virus. We
have had a number of comments, and
this one says, is it really safe
using Bluetooth? Can criminals take
using Bluetooth? (“an criminals take
personal info
using Bluetooth? Can criminals take
personal info from your phone? Will
personal info from your phone? will
it only work
personal info from your phone? Will
it only work with honesty from the
user? You have to report you have
symptoms. will
symptoms. Will it be any use? You
symptoms. will it be any use? You
need a
symptoms. Will it be any use? You
need a significant take up to get
the information you want from it.
james, what
James, what do you think of what you
james, what do you think of what you
have
James, what do you think of what you
have heard? Yeah can mention South
have heard? Yeah ran mention South
Korea, and
have heard? Yeah can mention South
Korea, and the reading I’ve been
doing about South Korea as they not
only use track and trace but also
some of the data that is freely
available, information from the GPS
availabla, information from the GPS
system, CCTV
available, information from the GPS
system, CCTV system and also as well
from credit card spending and things
like that, as I said during the we
need to give the tracers as much
information as possible and just
information as possibla and just
look at
information as possible and just
look at the sacrifice we have all
made that we need really to trust
the tracers to be able to meet that
target, to get this virus. 70 to 90%
target, to get this vims. 70 to 9096
of the peopla
target, to get this virus. 70 to 90%
of the people have been in contact
within the last two weeks. If we
don’t do that, we could have another
ﬂare-up. So
ﬂare-up. Sol
don’t do that, we could have another
flare—up. So I think the privacy
ﬂare-up. So I think the privacy
issue has
flare—up. So I think the privacy
issue has to
ﬂare-up. So I think the privacy
issue has to go
flare—up. So I think the privacy
issue has to go out of the window,
and we have to say this is what it
is, and we’ve got to use all the
available technology and data to
make sure that we can crack this
make sure that we ran crack this
virus, and
make sure that we can crack this
virus, and let’s start living again,
because we’ve all made too many
sacrifices, and we are trying to get
out of lockdown to save the economy
and jobs. It sounds like you’re
desperate to get out of the house,
and you will not be alone in that!
George, the governor has said it
wants to recruit 18,000 four contact
wants to recmit18,000 four contact
tracing. How
wants to recruit 18,000 four contact
tracing. How many have been
recruited so far? At 5000 so far, so
that’s being built. As we try and
evolve the policy and move out of
lockdown and trying to get back to
life as normal, 3 track and trace
life as normal, a track and trace
system along
life as normal, 3 track and trace
system along these lines will be a
critical tool.
criticaltool. Lets
system along these lines will be a
critical tool. Lets take a question
from Saskia Jennings. Do you think
from Saskia jennings. Do you think
it’s
from Saskia Jennings. Do you think
it’s appropriate to ease a lockdown
in all areas of the country at the
same time even though the effects of
the virus have not been evenly
distributed? The north—east, we have
distributed? The north-east, we have
seen high death
distributed? The north—east, we have
seen high death rates in towns like
Middlesbrough and Sunderland and I
Middlesbrough and Sundertand and I
don’t
Middlesbrough and Sunderland and I
don’t know if they should be managed
like other areas of the country like
the south—west. At Nicola Sturgeon
the south-west. At Nicola Sturgeon
today was
the south—west. At Nicola Sturgeon
today was talking about is Scotland
and saying she doesn’t see any
easing of lockdown anytime soon.
Nick, what do you think? What is the
Nick, what do you think? what is the
labour
Nick, what do you think? What is the
Labour view about is in the lockdown
labour view about is in the lockdown
differently in
Labour view about is in the lockdown
differently in different areas
depending on the infection rate, the
number of cases and so on? Well, I
sit
number of rases and so on? Well, I
sit here in
number of cases and so on? Well, I
sit here in Wales, Fiona, and there
have been moments in the crisis
where Wales has taken a slightly
different decisions. For example,
the guidelines are slightly
different but, on the whole, the
Welsh government, has tried to take
a four nations approach, and I think
that has been a sensible way to
proceed because we do all shared
these islands and, for example, my
own constituency, I would in
ordinary circumstances have people
ordinary circumstances have peopla
who
ordinary circumstances have people
who commuted to work, but a
different situation at the moment,
but ordinarily they would commute
over the border into Bristol, so it
gets very difficult if you have
things which are very different in
different parts of the country. The
only point I would make in relation
to that is that we just talked about
the contact tracing app. Clearly, if
the contact tracing app. Clearty, if
there
the contact tracing app. Clearly, if
there were to be after these
lockdown restrictions start to ease
a particular area where the tracing
aPP
app showed that there was a specific
problem, then clearly you might have
problam, then dearty you might have
to look at
problem, then clearly you might have
to look at that specific area so,
whilst I accept there will be
variations, and they have already
been variations, I think we should
try and go for the four visions
approach that the Welsh government
has been doing as much as possible.
But also ensure that, as the Prime
Minister moves forward, he to be
setting out a road map on Sunday,
that he works with the devolved
institutions in order to get that
consensus across the country,
because I think that is so
important. Chris, can you see from
important. Chris, ran you see from
the perspective
important. Chris, can you see from
the perspective of NHS workers that
you represent, is there an ottoman,
do you think? The government has
said it is too soon at the moment,
and the Prime Minister has made that
clear, but reintroducing the
lockdown in certain areas depending
on what is happening, but can you
on what is happening, but ran you
see an
on what is happening, but can you
see an argument, as Saskia says, for
easing the lockdown differently as
we go along? There is a real dilemma
here because one striking thing,
talking to trust chief executives,
is the degree to which this has
varied very much. We talk to trust
executives in London, it’s been
really difficult. In the south—west,
really difficult. In the south-west,
actually, they
really difficult. In the south—west,
actually, they have been saying that
relatively speaking it’s been...
relatively speaking it’s been. . .
They haven’t
relatively speaking it’s been...
They haven’t experienced the level
of demand they were expecting the
step but the bit we are missing,
which feels really important to me,
is one of the things about lockdown
has been the consistency of the
national communications. We need to
be clear about what it is that we
are meant to be doing and not. Do
you think it’s been inconsistent? My
argument would be, if we try and
have different areas doing different
things, it’s already complicated
enough as far as I’m concerned in
terms of what you are meant to be
doing and not doing, that that it
seems to me is a very strong
argument to
argument tojust be
seems to me is a very strong
argument to just be careful about
argument tojust be careful about
splitting the
argument to just be careful about
splitting the country into different
places trying to do different
things. Thank Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland can do it
differently. Clearly, the default
nations is issues, but all I say is
that you have this tension because
if you were just doing it on the
basis of where you had prevalence,
the first peak torque is clearly
the first peak torque is dearty
that
the first peak torque is clearly
that actually you are getting very
different spread in different areas.
What strikes me about the question,
what strikes me about the question,
not the
What strikes me about the question,
not the direct question, but Saskia
talks about easing the restrictions
and, given the figures today about
the death rate amongst black and
Asian minority ethnic people being
twice that once you take into
account numerous factors, twice that
of white people, in terms of their
of white peopla, in terms of their
risk, does
of white people, in terms of their
risk, does that in any sense affect
either protective measures or
lockdown, do you think? We have
regional disparities and a
remarkable disparity in ethnicity
remarkabla disparity in ethnicity
and, as you
remarkable disparity in ethnicity
and, as you said, today, figures
show that, if you are a black man in
this country, you are four times
more likely to die. And, if you
account for socio— economic factors
account for socio- economic factors
like
account for socio— economic factors
like self—reported health
conditions, poverty, they are still
twice as likely to die. This has not
been explained. Some of us from the
beginning, from the first anecdotal
evidence, have been asking for a
concerted effort to understand why
certain ethnic groups appear to be
so much more at risk. There is an
enquiry going on. Custom and there
is more data emerging. I have major
issues with the government enquiry
and its failure to gain trust among
the affected communities so far. But
my issue is this, really. If we are
to start easing restrictions,
measures will be taken when people
measures will be taken when peopla
return to
measures will be taken when people
return to work to protect them? I
have heard the NHS has told
employers in the NHS to take
necessary measures to protect ethnic
minority staff in light of the data,
but there has been no consistent
message about what employers should
do, knowing that their ethnic
minority staff are more likely to
die, to remove them from front—line
die, to remove them from front-line
duties and put
die, to remove them from front—line
duties and put extra precautionary
measures in place not doing that is
active neglect. That applies to the
workforce in general. I am not
confident there has been clear
messaging from the government about
what employers should do to keep
their workers safe if we start
returning to work. There are
non-binding
non—binding guidelines and ideas,
non-binding guidelines and ideas,
but
non—binding guidelines and ideas,
but there is nothing to say, this
categorically must happen to protect
workers. I think we may get to that
a bit further down the programme
George, there is Saskia’s question
about whether it’s appropriate to
ease the lockdown differently in
different areas and what Afua was
saying in terms of protecting ethnic
minorities. On the first point, as
Chris said, I think it’s preferable
to try and have a single approach
to try and have a singla approach
because
to try and have a single approach
because otherwise it gets confusing.
And some of the advice from the
Chief Medical Officer is that,
although the prevalence can be
different in different parts of the
country, the so—called R rate is
country, the so-ralled R rate is
quite similar
country, the so—called R rate is
quite similar across the country, so
the argument for having very
different approaches probably isn’t
very strong. But there are parts of
the country that have a lot of
tourism, so there are issues about
how we exit lockdown which sectors
of the economy to try and
tentatively open and at which stage,
and these are factors that will be
taken into account in that context.
Much the lockdown be lifted slightly
more in places like Cornwall and
Devon? The Prime Minister will give
his statement on Sunday. The key
thing is... Is that what you expect?
Everybody has to observe the current
restrictions but I think the Prime
Minister has already signalled that
Minister has already signallad that
what
Minister has already signalled that
what he is likely to outline on
Sunday is, if you like, a route map
Sunday is, ifyou like, a route map
about how
Sunday is, if you like, a route map
about how we can evolve this policy
about how we ran evolve this policy
for we
about how we can evolve this policy
for we will be very cautious because
we are dearty
we are clearly not out of the woods
we are dearty not out of the woods
on this by any
we are clearly not out of the woods
on this by any means. But I think we
are expecting a bit more than a
route map. He said, the reason we
are making the announcement on
Sunday so we can get going with some
Sunday so we ran get going with some
of the
Sunday so we can get going with some
of the measures on Monday, so from
what he said something will happen
on Monday. Some things might happen,
but we will be very cautious about
what happens and what timetable.
what happens and what timetabla.
This is
what happens and what timetable.
This is not going to be a single
announcement that that is the end of
the lockdown and everything is back
to normal. I don’t think anybody
expects that. We will have to live
with this virus for some time and
that means we will have to have a
gradual approach to loosening some
of these restrictions. Juergen
of these restrictions. juergen
Maier,
of these restrictions. Juergen
Maier, Saskia is asking about a
different way of easing restrictions
depending on where you live. I am
with Nick on this. We went in it
together, messaging wasn’t quite
clear enough and as we come out I
think we have to be together to help
simplify the messaging. That doesn’t
mean that we can’t then have
different interventions in different
parts of the country, so the rules
parts of the country, so the mles
are the
parts of the country, so the rules
are the same for everybody but, if
in Newcastle, which was the example
that was used, you have a flare—up,
that was used, you have a ﬂare-up,
then that is
that was used, you have a flare—up,
then that is where you move more
testing capacity, that is where you
move more of the track and tracers,
and I think also in terms of what
Afua was saying, we also need to say
there is evidence that clearly black
there is evidence that dearty black
men are
there is evidence that clearly black
men are unfortunately more
vulnerable in this situation, so we
need to be much more supportive to
black men and make testing available
to black men and make sure we have
got those earty
got those early interventions,
got those earty interventions,
certainly
got those early interventions,
certainly until we get to the point
where we have got more science to
understand why this is happening.
I’d like to add, black men have the
most serious disparity, but many
ethnic groups, could block of
Pakistani heritage, Bangladeshi
heritage, black and Asian women are
more likely to die from Covid, so
there is quite a wide number of
different ethnic minority
communities whose lives are at
stake, so it couldn’t be more
serious. I
serious. Ifeel there was
stake, so it couldn’t be more
serious. I feel there was a real
lack of intellectual curiosity from
lack of intellactual curiosity from
the
lack of intellectual curiosity from
the government about why this was
happening to stop it took a
concerted and consistent effort from
campaigners and journalists like me
falling
calling upon the covenant to take
this seriously and it was weeks
before we had any interests, let
alone an enquiry, and I
alone an enquiry, and Ifeel eyes
alone an enquiry, and I feel eyes
could
alone an enquiry, and Ifeel eyes
could have been saved if this was
taken seriously at an earlier stage.
taken seriously at an eartier stage.
This isn’t
taken seriously at an earlier stage.
This isn’t true, is a new virus and
we are learning new things all the
time for the Matt Hancock set up a
review to look at these issues, and
it isn’t just BME
it isn’tjust BME communities where
it isn’t just BME communities where
there
it isn’tjust BME communities where
there seems to be a higher incidence
of the virus and more deaths, there
are big links with obesity to deaths
from the virus, men are more likely
than women to die from the virus, so
there are many other factors that
need to be looked at. Let’s take
another question from Charles
Dobson. I’m apprehensive about
returning to work hot—desk king is
returning to work hot-desk king is
prevalent and
returning to work hot—desk king is
prevalent and colleagues less than
two metres away. Can you outline
two metres away. (“an you outline
what
two metres away. Can you outline
what precautions the government are
proposing to ensure safety at work?
I am apprehensive, he says, about
returning to work, where hot—desk
returning to work, where hot-desk
and is
returning to work, where hot—desk
and is prevalent and colleagues less
than two metres away. Can you
than two metres away. (“an you
outline
than two metres away. Can you
outline what precautions the
government are proposing to ensure
safety at work? Juergen Maier, you
safety at work? juergen Maier, you
are not mnning
safety at work? Juergen Maier, you
are not running Siemens but you are
are not mnning Siemens but you are
involved in
are not running Siemens but you are
involved in other companies. What is
involved in other companies. what is
your view about
involved in other companies. What is
your view about how this should go
ahead, for people like Charles? He
ahead, for peopla like Charlas? He
will not
ahead, for people like Charles? He
will not be the only one anxious
about how to feel safe at work.
Absolutely, and it’s such a perfect
question, because there are millions
of people feeling in exactly the
same way, and what’s certainly
needed
neededin
same way, and what’s certainly
needed in the statement on Sunday
and the plans we get thereafter is
really, really good guidance on how
safety in the workplace is going to
be ensured.
be ensured. There are obviously
things that can be done and a lot of
things that ran be done and a lot of
the economy
things that can be done and a lot of
the economy and it is working today.
The retail sector is working,
transport sectors are working. So we
learn from
transport sectors are working. 50 we
learn from those, and we make sure
we are putting the absolute right
measures in place. You mention the
example of hot testing. I think one
of the rules in offices will be that
of the mles in offices will be that
what testing
of the rules in offices will be that
what testing is not allowed, because
that is obviously the sharing of
equipment, or certainly, you know,
there would have to be a lot of
sanitising in between, but these
guidelines are going to have to be
crystal clear so we get a huge
amount of confidence, and there also
needs to be some policing of that.
And every company knows how to do
risk assessments to keep people safe
at work, and I think the same rules
at work, and I think the same mles
apply here and
at work, and I think the same rules
apply here and we have a Health and
Safety Executive that can help
enforced at and make sure they are
working together with businesses and
we are creating the right safe
working environment. Nick, do you
think the guidelines, sorry, not
guidelines, but the provisions put
in place for employees should be
legally binding? Well, I don’t think
lagally binding? Well, I don’t think
the
legally binding? Well, I don’t think
the guidelines that have been
suggested so far are sufficiently
precise and I think you absolutely
need better enforcement. But we’ve
been arguing for a national safety
standard, and we are putting that
together with employers, with the
TUC, and of course across political
parties so everybody can have
confidence, whether employers,
employees, everybody in the
workplace, they can be sure going
workplace, they ran be sure going
back to
workplace, they can be sure going
back to work. I think there needs to
be, yes, a recognition that
workplaces are different. But we
need to be risk assessing our
workplaces, we need to be looking at
distancing, weather screens,
supplying the appropriate personal
equipment, and then along
equipment, and then alongside
supplying the appropriate personal
equipment, and then along side that
we absolutely need an enforcement
mechanism, and quite rightly
mechanism, and quite rightlyJuergen
mechanism, and quite rightly juergen
mention
mechanism, and quite rightlyJuergen
mention the Health and Safety
Executive and there are local
authorities as well of course but
what we really need is sufficient
resource available for that
enforcement to take place. If that
is the use,
is the case, then we can have
confidence going forward that people
confidence going forward that peopla
do feel
confidence going forward that people
do feel safe going to work, and
employers as well feel certain about
what they are required to do. On
that subject, we have had a tweet in
from [aura
from Laura Herod. If and when the
from [aura Herod. If and when the
schools
from Laura Herod. If and when the
schools return, obviously teachers
are key employees as well, will
teachers be expected to wear PPE?
Act delete my Nick was referring to
PPE. Afua? I
PPE. Afua? Ithink
Act delete my Nick was referring to
PPE. Afua? I think this is where
trust comes
trust comes in —— and Nick was
trust comes in -- and Nick was
referring to PPE.
trust comes in —— and Nick was
referring to PPE. I have seen
unions, workers groups, already
voicing quite extreme concern about
whether they will be protected when
they return to work. Amidst this we
have the spectre of the people on
the front line not being properly
the front line not being property
protected
the front line not being properly
protected so there is a real sense
that people’s lives are being put
unnecessarily at risk, and I’m as
keen as everybody else to be able to
get back to some semblance of
normality, for my daughter to return
to school, but on the other hand I
think we do need those assurances
that we will be kept safe and I
think they need to be crystal clear,
as juergen
asJuergen said, really important
as juergen said, really important
phrase. But
asJuergen said, really important
phrase. But also they need to be
binding because we know there are
employers who will float good
employers who will ﬂoat good
practice
employers who will float good
practice and we know we don’t have a
perfect record of safety at work, so
this is the time for those standards
to be increased and heightened and
made crystal clear and not to be
optional. We have had another
comment in on workplace guidance on
coronavims,
coronavirus, should they be legally
coronavims, should they be lagally
binding or
coronavirus, should they be legally
binding or optional extras? I think
we need to be careful about making
the assumption it is all on the
guidelines. Can I share my dilemma
guidelines. (“an I share my dilamma
as
guidelines. (“an I share my dilemma
as the
guidelines. Can I share my dilemma
as the chief executive of an
organisations? We only have 60
staff, but our office is really
quite difficult because we have a
really narrow corridor which
effectively enables people to get to
and from their desk. There is no way
we will be able to observe social
distancing... Or have a one—way
distancing... Or have a one-way
system. Yeah,
distancing... Or have a one—way
system. Yeah, you can have all the
system. Yeah, you ran have all the
guidelines you
system. Yeah, you can have all the
guidelines you like, but what
actually you also need is you need
leaders of organisations who think
that the welfare of their staff is
by far the most important thing, and
certainly that is the way we act as
our senior leadership team in our
organisation, but also need the
ingenuity of staff to help you do
things like work out how would you
create a one—way system... Do you
create a one-way system... Do you
think
create a one—way system... Do you
think these things, because
obviously you are talking about the
peopla in
people in your office, but when it
peopla in your office, but when it
comes to Andy
people in your office, but when it
comes to Andy Lynch workers,
community trust, hospital workers,
your obviously here is the face of
that --
that —— when it comes to ambulance
that -- when it comes to ambulance
workers. Do you
that —— when it comes to ambulance
workers. Do you think these
protections for workers should be
lagally
legally binding, as has been
suggested, or
suggested, oras
legally binding, as has been
suggested, or as optional extras?
suggested, oras optional extras? I
suggested, or as optional extras? I
don’t
suggested, oras optional extras? I
don’t think they should be optional
extras. I think we should absolutely
ensure that leader limit are held to
appropriate account for creating
safe workplaces. To be frank, that
is what existing health and safety
lagislation
legislation does. 50 that is legally
lagislation does. So that is lagally
binding? It
legislation does. 50 that is legally
binding? It is, and what we also
know is life is now becoming really
complex. I spoke to a hospital chief
exec the other day who literally had
to divide their hospital into a
Covid—19 zone and a non—Covid—19
Covid-19 zone and a non-Covid-19
zone and
Covid—19 zone and a non—Covid—19
zone and that has created some
really complicated issues. The
classic example is we are all
saying, quite rightly, let’s restart
all the elective surgery, for
example, but that particular
hospital will lose quite a lot of
its capacity because effectively it
has to divide that hospital into a
safe Covid—19 zone a safe non—Covid
safe Covid-19 zone a safe non-Covid
zone, so there
safe Covid—19 zone a safe non—Covid
zone, so there are those challenges
for people to provide the proper
environment for their staff.
environment fortheirstaff. I
for people to provide the proper
environment for their staff. I met
when you hear about Charles filling
“P
up a rent to work on a hot desk in,
colleagues less than two metres
away, as far as your concern should
someone like Charles be able to say
without fear of being laid off, it’s
not safe enough? "It’s not adhering
to best practice? I’m not going to
come in? Close but is why we have
been working with working with
employers, with unions, over the
last two weeks, in the Government,
__ yes,
-- yes, that is
last two weeks, in the Government,
—— yes, that is why we have been
-- yes, that is why we have been
working with. It is
—— yes, that is why we have been
working with. It is important to
note there are sectors of the
economy that never shut down. The
food industry for which I am
responsible, people go to acid
responsible, peopla go to acid
outlat
responsible, people go to acid
outlet and will see Dot might also
outlat and will see Dot might also
food
outlet and will see Dot might also
food manufacturers, bread
manufacturers, dairies and so on, ——
manufacturers, dairies and so on, --
and they will see
manufacturers, dairies and so on, ——
and they will see food
manufacturers. When I talk to those
businesses their level of absence
due to people self isolating through
coronavirus has fallen from a peak
of 20% at the very beginning of this
of 2096 at the very beginning of this
episode
of 20% at the very beginning of this
episode about five weeks ago down to
about between 3—6% which is actually
about between 3-696 which is actually
quite close to
about between 3—6% which is actually
quite close to normal level. But
quite close to normal lavel. But
coming to
quite close to normal level. But
coming to Charles’s question,
coming to Charlas’s question,
though, ran
coming to Charles’s question,
though, can you outline what
though, ran you outline what
precautions
though, can you outline what
precautions the Government is
proposing to ensure safety at work?
How ran you
How can you make someone like
How ran you make someone like
Charles
How can you make someone like
Charles feel safe? Are you going to
make it legally binding? As the TUC
make it lagally binding? As the TUC
was
make it legally binding? As the TUC
was suggesting you should. Or is it
just going to be something you
expect companies to go along with?
Look, the difficulty of being too
prescriptive is that different
businesses will have different
approaches and so for instance in
the retail sector we discovered a
small convenience store might have a
very different approach to a large
supermarket, and the practicalities
of doing things are different and
large supermarkets for instance
might restrict cars going on at the
might restrict tars going on at the
entrance,
might restrict cars going on at the
entrance, and obviously a small
corner shop will take a different
approach. You need to have enough
ﬂexibility for
flexibility for employers to be able
ﬂexibility for employers to be able
to do
flexibility for employers to be able
to do what works in their
environment. I think in the office
environment he cited with hot desk
and, I
and, Ithink
environment he cited with hot desk
and, I think the reality is there
will still be a strong encouragement
of businesses that are office—based
of businesses that are office-based
to
of businesses that are office—based
to enable people still to work from
to enabla peopla still to work from
home as
to enable people still to work from
home as far as possible, so that
actually you don’t have high
densities of people crowded into
those office environments using
shared equipment. My issue here, I
feel we need a bit of reality. There
will be lots of responsible
employers. There already are, doing
the kinds of thinking you’re doing,
taking the right steps and really
investing and caring about
protecting their workforce, but
there will always be employers who
are not responsible and willing to
put their workers at risk, and these
conversations are designed to
protect people who work for the
protect peopla who work for the
worst
protect people who work for the
worst case scenario business and
worst rase scenario business and
that’s why we
worst case scenario business and
that’s why we need stringent
measures that are not optional
because otherwise people who are
vulnerable who are too insecure to
be able to challenge safety at work
or too dependent on zero hours or
other insecure contracts to opt out
of working won’t be protected. 50 we
of working won’t be protected. So we
have to be
of working won’t be protected. 50 we
have to be thinking about the
of working won’t be protected. So we
have to be thinking about the worst
case scenario, not the best case
rase scenario, not the best rase
scenario.
case scenario, not the best case
scenario. What are your thoughts?
scenario. what are your thoughts?
That is
scenario. What are your thoughts?
That is not Eric’s parents, dealing
with the business. There are large
companies and small companies do
everybody takes this very seriously.
-- that is
—— that is not our experience.
-- that is not our experience.
Employers
—— that is not our experience.
Employers their employees very
fiercely. The reason the Health and
Safety Executive exist is because
there are people that don’t take it
easily. Are you suggesting they all
miraculously well now? The Health
and Safety Executive have been
involved in guidance with food
companies, as has Public Health
England, and the Food Standards
Agency as well. All of those
agencies have been working and
contributing to the guidance
businesses are following. Like Mike
but are you anticipating... Sorry,
juergen. The
Juergen. The point, Fiona, there is
juergen. The point, Fiona, there is
an existing
Juergen. The point, Fiona, there is
an existing process. Every director
of an
of an Of a company, they know
their responsibility in keeping
their employees say. That is crystal
clear and you have to do that at any
time. We are now adding living and
working with Covid as a requirement
to keep safe. We get some guidelines
around that. I totally agree with
Afua, most employers will do that
because they take it seriously, and
quite frankly they don’t they
shouldn’t be in business, safety
comes number one. And the Health and
Safety Executive will enforce the
few that don’t come and it is a few.
In addition to many, in my
experience. George, from where you
are sitting in Government, do you
think it’s going to be difficult to
get peopla
get people back to work? Obviously
get peopla back to work? Obviously
peopla are
get people back to work? Obviously
people are desperate to start
earning again and all of that, but
they are anxious as well. There will
be some apprehension, of course, and
that’s why we have been working on
this guidance. Coming back to my
experience in the sector where they
had high absentee levels of about
20% at the beginning, and it is
2096 at the beginning, and it is
right now
20% at the beginning, and it is
right now down to about four or 5%,
right now down to about four or 596,
which isn’t
right now down to about four or 5%,
which isn’t much different to
normal, so what people discovered is
once those social distancing
measures were put in place staff
returned to work, some of them
returned from being in isolation,
some of them return because perhaps
they were anxious but had learned
that actually these measures had
been put in place that reassure
them. But we will all have different
complications, won’t we? We work in
the centre of London and when we
have been talking to our staff about
beginning to think about what might
happen, quite rightly, one of the
things they immediately raise,
what’s it going to be like
travelling to work into central
London and actually being on a
packed Tube train next to people who
might present a safety risk? I think
one of the issues the Government
faces is this is quite multifaceted,
it’s not... George talks about the
food industry because he is
responsible for that but we also
need to ensure transport is
appropriately configured, so this is
quite a complex picture if we are
actually going to be able to
encourage people, and enable and
encourage peopla, and enabla and
support
encourage people, and enable and
support them, to come back to work.
We have the example of other
countries ahead of first night we
ran
can follow. Which is helpful, we can
ran follow. which is helpful, we ran
learn from
can follow. Which is helpful, we can
learn from that. I have to say our
hour is up and lots of questions,
sorry I didn’t get round them.
Margaret and James, you asked
Margaret and james, you asked
questions
Margaret and James, you asked
questions at the beginning and you
satin and listen so thanks very much
for your patience and questions at
the beginning. We were hoping to get
more of you at home to take part in
the programme live. If you think you
would be up for that let us know and
of course you ran
of course you can prerecord your
of course you ran prerecord your
question but I
of course you can prerecord your
question but I am keen to get as
much of that in as I can. Let us
much of that in as I ran. Let us
know in the
much of that in as I can. Let us
know in the usual way the question
time website. And if you want to
marry on
carry on the discussion we have been
having this evening, ask questions,
get more of your comments across,
you ran
you ranjoin
get more of your comments across,
you canjoin guest on Extra Time on
you ranjoin guest on Extra Time on
five live
you canjoin guest on Extra Time on
five live now. But to Margaret and
james, to Nick
James, to Nick and Juergen, for
james, to Nick and juergen, for
joining down
James, to Nick and Juergen, for
joining down the line, a little peek
into your homes, not enough for my
liking, but thank you, and of course
to George, Chris and Afua for
joining in the studio, and to you
for watching Question Time, goodbye.
So...
I hear you’ve been very naughty.
Have I?
When faced with
time on your hands...
..and a magnificent model...
..why not pick up a pencil and draw?
From a sensible distance, of course.
Relax and be part of
a live life drawing class
and sketch a pose at home or online.
Fergus, Laura, I’d like to introduce
you to the rock royalty we’re
going to speak to later
on in this podcast.
What?
It’s Brian May!
Hello, Brian.
Hi, Brian.
Hello, Fergus and Laura.
Hello!
How are you doing?
I’m doing 0K, apart from an injury
to some of my muscles
which I sustained in the garden.
Oh, no!
I can’t walk or sleep at the moment.
Really?
Oh, no!
Apart from that, you’re fine(!).
Apart from that, I’m great.
Excellent.
Well, get well soon.
We’ll speak to you at length
about what you’re doing to raise
money for the World Health
Organisation.
I thought it was The Who —
as in the WHO, not the Who —
but we can clear that up in a bit.
We’ll clarify it.
Thank you forjoining us.
We won’t get fooled again, will we?
Let’s talk about all the day’s news
as well in this edition
of the Coronavirus Newscast.
The Coronavirus Newscast
from the BBC.
Hello.
It’s Adam in the studio.
And Laura in the same studio,
but two metres apart.
And Fergus in another studio
in New Broadcasting House.
And we’re going to bejoined
for the first part of this
podcast by Gavin Barwell,
Lord Barwell, who used
to be chief of staff
to the previous Prime Minister,
Theresa May.
Hello, Gavin.
Hi.
I was going to call you Lord R—well,
seeing as we’re talking about the R
number all the time now.
No?
0K, never mind.
So the reason we brought you in,
Gavin, was to get some insight
into how difficult it is making big
decisions like how do you perhaps
tweak the social distancing rules
and how do you communicate it
to the public, because that’s
the sort of decisions you had
to make when you were in government.
First of all, I wanted to say,
Newscasters have been coming up
with potential names
for the next phase.
0h!
The unlockdown.
The unfurling.
Liftoff, or my favourite one...
Quarantween.
Because it’s in between.
Oh, I was thinking rollback.
Some people have been
talking about rollback
or "unwind" I’ve also heard.
But it’s not going to be a giant
flinging open of the doors, is it?
We expected all week that at some
point, and now we know it
will be 7pm on Sunday,
we will hear from the Prime Minister
the gradual route out of this,
but he said yesterday some
of the restrictions might be
unwound as early as Monday,
and the government confirmed last
night the stay—at—home message,
which has been so successful
in keeping people at home,
will be dispatched,
but today has been a bit
tricky for the government,
with these things all coming out.
We saw Dominic Raab,
the Foreign Secretary,
at the Downing Street briefing
revealing his version of the slogan,
and it’s definitely not as exciting
or concise as quarantween.
Have a listen.
We had updated evidence from Sage
and there’s further evidence coming
through and we have to take those
decisions at the right moment
in time based on that evidence,
and whatever has been reported
in the newspapers is not a reliable
guide to either the evidence
we are getting or the policy
decisions we will be taking,
so that is why it’s very important
that the Prime Minister on Sunday
will set out a road map,
and I think it is safe to say that
any changes in the short term
will be modest, small,
incremental and very
carefully monitored and,
as of now, there are no changes.
Modest, small, incremental
and carefully monitored.
That’s catchy.
Really tricky, because
the government was facing
lots of demands from its critics,
saying, you’ve got to tell
us what the plan is,
you’ve got to give us
an exit strategy.
Now they’re tiptoeing towards one,
but at the same time there’s a huge
risk of mixing the message.
Really difficult.
Gavin, as somebody who has pulled
the levers of government,
how hard is this balancing act
and this salesjob
and communication job?
I think this is harder
than anything I had to deal
with for a number of reasons...
Brexit?
Yeah, this is a much more
difficult issue than Brexit.
I have every sympathy for the people
at Number Ten at the moment.
The first thing is that there isn’t
a scientific consensus.
This is a new virus,
so the scientists are not
all agreed, so when you say,
I’m following the scientific advice,
well, whose advice?
And the second issue is we know this
crisis will lead to people dying
in three different ways —
some people from the virus,
some because they didn’t seek
medical attention during the crisis,
and that will affect them
going forward, and some people
because of the increased deprivation
that will come from the economic
consequences, and the people that
listen this are getting one figure
every night and the other two
we can’t see at the moment,
so how do you strike that balance?
I think Laura was talking
about the potential communications
challenge, because they’ll want
people to resume some sort